Consumer Beware: With Less Trade Comes Less Choice; Imports take blame for demise of U.S. car brands, but overall variety expands economy

If you're part of the shrinking share of Americans who still prefer cars to trucks or SUVs, I have some bad news: Your world is getting smaller. Just two years ago, you could choose from 90 different models, from large to subcompact. By next year, that will shrivel to just 62.

Some of the cars that will disappear from the lineup, including General Motors Co.'s Chevrolet Cruze and Ford Motor Co.'s Focus, will still be manufactured and sold overseas; they just won't be available to Americans.

This mostly reflects a strategic choice: GM, Ford and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles NV have concluded their capital is better invested in expanding their lineup of high-margin trucks and SUVs and electric and autonomous cars, rather than in passenger cars, where sales are sinking and profits are razor-thin.

But at the margin, a shift in the direction of globalization is also at work. Falling trade barriers enabled multinational companies to integrate their supply chains and rationalize operations across borders, to minimize costs and maximize product offerings. In the process, some American factory workers lost their jobs . President Trump has promised to bring them back, and autos have long been a priority. He has reworked trade treaties to raise the bar for tariff-free imports and harangued manufacturers who cut production at home while boosting it abroad.

On Wednesday, responding to GM's decision to idle several U.S. factories, including one in Ohio that makes the Cruze, Mr. Trump renewed a threat to impose 25% tariffs on all imported cars, predicting, "many more cars would be built here." Yet many now-imported models would sell too few units to justify domestic production, so showroom selection would almost certainly shrink.

The traditional case for trade was that it lets countries specialize where they have a comparative advantage: Portugal in wine, England in cloth. But it turns out that countries benefit even more by trading similar products because of the great value consumers place on variety. Americans are much more likely to find the perfect fit for their tastes if their choices include Scotch whisky, French cheese and Scandinavian crime fiction. This is especially true with products such as cars that require steep up-front investments and economies of scale: A larger transnational market can support more brands and models than several isolated national markets.

Trade data doesn't fully capture the benefit of variety. For example, if only red wine is made domestically, access to imported white is quite desirable--but tough to value. Between 1972 and 2001, the range of products imported by the U.S. grew fourfold, according to a 2004 paper by David Weinstein of Columbia University and Christian Broda, then at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. They put the unmeasured value of this increased variety at 2.8% of gross domestic product.

Last year a team of economists at the New York Fed found that 85% of the increase in imports from China between 2000 and 2006 came from products that had never been imported before, delivering a substantial unmeasured benefit through greater variety.

The U.S. car market is a prime example of the benefits of imported variety. Kristin Dziczek, an economist at the industry-backed Center for Automotive Research, says it's "unbelievably hard" for American manufacturers to make cars profitably, no matter how much they automate or what concessions their unions offer. A growing share of cars is thus made by foreign companies, imported, or both. According to Edmunds.com, 19 of 20 subcompact and 17 of 27 compact cars offered in the U.S. are imported.

Early last year Ford scrapped plans to move production of the Focus from Michigan to Mexico after criticism from then-President-elect Trump. Ford then sought to import it from an underutilized plant in China, but dropped that plan after Mr. Trump imposed a 25% tariff on Chinese imports. It now plans to discontinue offering the car in the U.S.

Last year Mr. Trump also lit into GM for importing the Cruze from Mexico. This was a misfire: GM only imports the hatchback version, a fraction of U.S. sales, from Mexico. Sedans sold in the U.S. are made in Ohio. Once production ends, GM won't import the Cruze: It will just stop selling it. "It's a question of resource allocation: We'd rather invest in higher growth opportunities across the company," a spokesman says. Still, GM will continue to sell Mexican-made Cruzes in Latin America and Israel and, possibly, Canada.

While GM didn't cite tariffs or trade tensions as driving its decisions, they clearly didn't help: Tariffs on steel, aluminum and imported Chinese parts all eat into what are already thin margins on cars in the U.S.

That Mr. Trump's trade tactics sometimes hurt consumers doesn't make them wrong: It may be a necessary price if Mr. Trump is to coax foreign countries into concessions that lower the barriers to American companies, workers and exporters. But in the end, consumers have to have more to choose from than before; otherwise, they'll be losers.